Add namespace trespassing anti-pattern (#12966)
elixir-lang/elixir: lib/elixir/pages/anti-patterns/design-anti-patterns.md

## Scattered side-effects

#### Problem

Elixir code tends to be explicit: it receives all inputs as arguments and returns all outputs. Furthermore, a given piece of code is clearer if, when called with the same inputs, it always returns the same output, without performing any other change in the system.

For example, `String.split/2` fits this definition. It receives three arguments and, if the arguments do not change, the result is always the same:

```elixir
iex> String.split("hello world", " ")
["hello", "world"]
iex> String.split("hello world", " ")
["hello", "world"]
```

On the other hand, `System.unique_integer/0` returns a different value, every time we call it:

```elixir
iex> System.unique_integer()
-576460752303423478
iex> System.unique_integer()
-576460752303423446
```

We say that the `System.unique_integer/0` is *impure*, as it contains side-effects. When you invoke it, it changes the state of the program or the environment in a way that is not reflected on the output. On the other hand, we say `String.split/2` is *pure*. As a general rule, *pure* functions are easier to debug, test, and maintain then *impure* ones.

> Side-effects are essential when writing production software. Reading a file, logging a message, sending messages between processes, etc. are all side-effects. Writing code with side-effects is not an anti-pattern. However, you want to write your code where side-effects are located in key areas, instead of scattered throughout your functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Side-effects are essential when writing production software. Reading a file, logging a message, sending messages between processes, etc. are all side-effects. Writing code with side-effects is not an anti-pattern. However, you must only write your code with side-effects in key areas of your codebase, instead of scattered throughout many functions.
```

#### Example

> TODO.

Author: Can you think of a good example for us to include here?

Author: I thought about a similar examples that reserializes data but I am worried it is too simplistic. Perhaps I should write three functions: `read_and_decode`, `transform`, and `encode_and_write`, and say it would be better with `read` |> `decode_transform_encode` |> `write`?

Reviewer: I think the two examples mentioned by you are excellent because they touch on the **essence of the problem**: When we have a poorly cohesive function unnecessarily contaminated with side-effects, we have a smell. 

**Solution:** separate the inevitable side-effects into specific functions, thus making the codebase more cohesive and isolating the side-effects from functions that have the potential to be pure.

Perhaps _another possible example_ could be something related to a database using Ecto.

**Bad example:**

Code that performs CRUD operations scattered across many modules, spreading side-effects throughout the codebase.

**Good example:**

Consolidate all CRUD operations into a single module (Persistence Layer). This module would have functions with isolated side-effects from the rest of the codebase, making everything more cohesive as well.

For example, `String.split/2` fits this definition. It receives three arguments and, if the arguments do not change, the result is always the same:

```elixir
iex> String.split("hello world", " ")
["hello", "world"]
iex> String.split("hello world", " ")
["hello", "world"]
```

On the other hand, `System.unique_integer/0` returns a different value, every time we call it:

```elixir
iex> System.unique_integer()
-576460752303423478
iex> System.unique_integer()
-576460752303423446
```

We say that the `System.unique_integer/0` is *impure*, as it contains side-effects. When you invoke it, it changes the state of the program or the environment in a way that is not reflected on the output. On the other hand, we say `String.split/2` is *pure*. As a general rule, *pure* functions are easier to debug, test, and maintain then *impure* ones.

Side-effects are essential when writing production software. Reading a file, logging a message, sending messages between processes, etc. are all side-effects. Writing code with side-effects is not an anti-pattern. However, you must avoid scattering side-effects throughout your functions.

> #### Example

Author: @whatyouhide @lucasvegi: I have added an example although I am not quite sure how happy I am with it. The discussion is complex and there is a nuance of exceptions being side-effects.

Reviewer: @josevalim @whatyouhide I'm not sure if this example is showcasing 'scattering' well. If I'm not mistaken, in the example before refactoring, out of the 4 functions, two have side-effects (`recode!/1` and `encode_and_write!/2`). In the refactored code, the main change in terms of reducing 'scattering' was the elimination of the `encode_and_write!/2`, moving its body inside the `recode!/1` function, leaving it as the only one with side-effects among the remaining 3.

I understand that the second code undoubtedly has a better design than the first, I'm just not sure if it illustrates the concept of 'scattering' so clearly.

Author: Reading a file also has side-effects so all functions except the transformation one has side-effects. But I have a feeling the example could be better (or we discard the smell altogether).

Reviewer: @josevalim, I thought a bit more and realized that I was confusing the granularity of what we consider 'scattering.' I was thinking more about scattering at a 'macro' level in the project, meaning something spread across many modules (e.g., CRUD operations). In your example, I understand that you have a finer-grained view, meaning scattered among functions within the same module.

So, with your observation that reading a file also has side-effects, I think the example is good, but it might even be better if we added comments to each function indicating whether it has side-effects or not. This way, it will be more evident to the reader (users of our catalog) that the scattering has decreased between the original and refactored code. Of course, this kind of comment wouldn't be suitable for production code, but I think it would work well for educational purposes.

Consider a functionality that must parse JSON files from disk, convert all keys to lowercase, and write the updated version to the same file. An initial implementation would look like this:

```elixir
defmodule Recode do
  require Logger

  def recode!(file) do
    data = read_and_decode!(file)
    data = transform_data(data)
    encode_and_write!(file, data)
  end

  defp transform_data(data) do
    Map.new(data, fn {k, v} -> {String.downcase(k), v} end)
  end

>   defp read_and_decode!(file) do

Author: ```suggestion
  defp read_and_decode!(file) do
    # Side-effect: reads a file from disk
```

    file |> File.read!() |> Jason.decode!()
  end

>   defp encode_and_write!(file, data) do

Author: ```suggestion
  defp encode_and_write!(file, data) do
    # Side-effect: writes a file to disk
```

    File.write!(file, Jason.encode!(data))
  end
end
```

> The code above has side-effects, such as reading and writing files, scattered around different functions. This makes the code harder to understand and maintain. For instance, as the `transform_data` function grows in complexity, the only way to test it is by writing and reading data from disk, which makes tests more complex and expensive then necessary.

Author: ```suggestion
The code above has side-effects, such as reading and writing files, scattered around different functions. This makes the code harder to understand and maintain. For instance, as the `transform_data/1` function grows in complexity, the only way to test it is by writing and reading data from disk, which makes tests more complex and expensive then necessary.
```

#### Refactoring

> To refactor this anti-pattern, we want break our code into smaller functions without side-effects, and rely on side-effects only when connecting all logic together. To do so, we define a new `recode_contents!` function, which works directly on the contents of a file, instead of file themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To refactor this anti-pattern, we want break our code into smaller functions without side-effects, and rely on side-effects only when connecting all logic together. To do so, we define a new `recode_contents!/1` function, which works directly on the contents of a file, instead of file themselves.
```

```elixir
defmodule Recode do
  require Logger

  def recode!(file) do

>     binary = File.read!(file)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Side-effects now concentrated in a single logic connection function
    binary = File.read!(file)
```

    File.write!(file, recode_contents!(binary))
  end

>   def recode_contents!(binary) when is_binary(binary) do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  defp recode_contents!(binary) when is_binary(binary) do
```

    binary
    |> Jason.decode!()
    |> transform_data()
    |> Jason.encode!()
  end

  defp transform_data(data) do
    Map.new(data, fn {k, v} -> {String.downcase(k), v} end)
  end
end
```

> One of the benefits of the approach above is that it is now possible to test the encoding and decoding logic directly, without having to resort to files.

Author: ```suggestion
One of the benefits of unifying the side-effects, alongside with making the `recode_contents!/1` function public, is that it is now possible to test the encoding and decoding logic directly, without having to manipulate files.
```

> Finally, it is worth noting that `recode_contents!` may still raise exceptions when given invalid JSON data and exceptions are also side-effects. Our goal is not to avoid side-effects at all costs, but understand their benefits and impact on our code. After all, exceptions are an important mechanism to signal something went wrong in our code, as long as we are not [*using exceptions for flow control*](#using-exceptions-for-control-flow).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, it is worth noting that `recode_contents!/1` may still raise exceptions when given invalid JSON data and exceptions are also side-effects. Our goal is not to avoid side-effects at all costs, but understand their benefits and impact on our code. After all, exceptions are an important mechanism to signal something went wrong in our code, as long as we are not [*using exceptions for flow control*](#using-exceptions-for-control-flow).
```

```elixir
iex> String.split("hello world", " ")
["hello", "world"]
iex> String.split("hello world", " ")
["hello", "world"]
```

On the other hand, `System.unique_integer/0` returns a different value, every time we call it:

```elixir
iex> System.unique_integer()
-576460752303423478
iex> System.unique_integer()
-576460752303423446
```

We say that the `System.unique_integer/0` is *impure*, as it contains side-effects. When you invoke it, it changes the state of the program or the environment in a way that is not reflected on the output. On the other hand, we say `String.split/2` is *pure*. As a general rule, *pure* functions are easier to debug, test, and maintain then *impure* ones.

Side-effects are essential when writing production software. Reading a file, logging a message, sending messages between processes, etc. are all side-effects. Writing code with side-effects is not an anti-pattern. However, you must avoid scattering side-effects throughout your functions.

#### Example

Consider a functionality that must parse JSON files from disk, convert all keys to lowercase, and write the updated version to the same file. An initial implementation would look like this:

> 
> ```elixir
> defmodule Recode do
>   require Logger
> 
>   def recode!(file) do
>     data = read_and_decode!(file)
>     data = transform_data(data)
>     encode_and_write!(file, data)
>   end
> 
>   defp transform_data(data) do
>     Map.new(data, fn {k, v} -> {String.downcase(k), v} end)
>   end
> 
>   defp read_and_decode!(file) do
>     # Side-effect: reads a file from disk
>     file |> File.read!() |> Jason.decode!()
>   end
> 
>   defp encode_and_write!(file, data) do
>     # Side-effect: writes a file to disk
>     File.write!(file, Jason.encode!(data))
>   end
> end
> ```
> 
> The code above has side-effects, such as reading and writing files, scattered around different functions. This makes the code harder to understand and maintain. For instance, as the `transform_data/1` function grows in complexity, the only way to test it is by writing and reading data from disk, which makes tests more complex and expensive then necessary.
> 
> #### Refactoring
> 
> To refactor this anti-pattern, we want break our code into smaller functions without side-effects, and rely on side-effects only when connecting all logic together. To do so, we define a new `recode_contents!/1` function, which works directly on the contents of a file, instead of file themselves.
> 
> ```elixir
> defmodule Recode do
>   require Logger
> 
>   def recode!(file) do
>     # Side-effects now concentrated in a single function
>     binary = File.read!(file)
>     File.write!(file, recode_contents!(binary))
>   end
> 
>   def recode_contents!(binary) when is_binary(binary) do
>     binary
>     |> Jason.decode!()
>     |> transform_data()
>     |> Jason.encode!()
>   end
> 
>   defp transform_data(data) do
>     Map.new(data, fn {k, v} -> {String.downcase(k), v} end)
>   end
> end
> ```
> 
> One of the benefits of unifying the side-effects, alongside with making the `recode_contents!/1` function public, is that it is now possible to test the encoding and decoding logic directly, without having to manipulate files.
> 
> Finally, it is worth noting that `recode_contents!/1` may still raise exceptions when given invalid JSON data and exceptions are also side-effects. Our goal is not to avoid side-effects at all costs, but understand their benefits and impact on our code. After all, exceptions are an important mechanism to signal something went wrong in our code, as long as we are not [*using exceptions for flow control*](#using-exceptions-for-control-flow).
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
